# Lapland 2024 blog

My latest “real” trek had been since September 2022, although a story for another time, it was rather short and I was in a weird and very dynamic period of my life where several things were starting to change, not in small part coinciding with my erasmus exchange in Gothenburg — Sweden.

This trek was set out to be different though, more than twice as long and far exceeding the amount of ascent and descent. With a total length of 174km and around 3700m up and 3700m down it became my longest fully autonomous trek, carrying everything we needed. I did this trek together with a good friend I met on erasmus the year prior; it was her first time embarking on anything like this, which always bring with it unavoidable healthy stress for both her and me, knowing I’m at least partly responsible for whatever happens. Anyway, this makes it sound as if it was some irresponsible adventure, though an adventure it was, _exciting_ would be a more apt adjective.

The route consisted of a section of the Nordkallotleden (or Nordkallotrutta, depending on who you ask), a long trail going through Sweden, Norway, and Finland all the way in the North of Lapland. The section I had my eye on started in Björkliden, a small town between Narvik and Kiruna, situated on the Southern shore of Torneträsk, translating to Torne lake (or swamp in standard Swedish), Torne being derived of the Tornedalian people, literally “spear valley” people. This lake would be the main visual attraction for the first day of the trek. But I am getting ahead of myself. Let’s start at the beginning: We landed in Stockholm, capital of Sweden, and after multiple attempts, finally acquiring a gas canister allowed us to get on our sleeper train towards Björkliden. Almost 18 hours of anticipation and comfortable train rocking, amazing for good sleep by the way, and we had arrived. We set off, our bags being the heaviest they’d be all 10 days and the wayfinding, we needed a few k’s to get used to it. But the first day promised to be chill, barely any elevation until my planned camp location.

After 7km, we crossed the last paved road for a long time, we wouldn’t come into contact with any civilization all trip long. It was a beautiful first day, temperatures reaching the twenties °C, and a beautiful sun making the hills reflect on the calm lake. Almost at the 20km mark we set up camp across the Swedish-Norwegian border, already marking the second country of the trek. I set up the tent in a blueberry covered patch of level moss. I had missed finding a nice spot, considering the rocks, the orientation of the tent to wake up with a nice view, and the wind. The first night already blessed us with a real show, strong aurora borealis for at least 2hours. The temperatures were quickly dropping though, but nothing that a warm sleeping bag outside couldn’t solve. I had missed this. But this night was not perfect, I had recognized the sleeping bag Anna brought, not from any of the words on it, but from the colour, it was the 15°C sleeping bag from Decathlon, I had a -5°C one. Although I repeatedly clarified which equipment she should bring, the hefty price of a good down sleeping bag had prompted her to lend one from a friend that promised her he had never been cold in it, turns out he also never slept in a cold place with it. Her first night was awful, shivering from the cold because she had taken her sweet time to change from her day to her night clothes and subsequently cooled down and never properly warmed up again. This immediately made clear to me that this adventure would come with some perils and that I should not lose focus.

The next day was smooth, the birch trees gave way to beautiful, vast, rocky landscapes. The trail became more rugged and hard to track, but the direction was clear: North by way of the valley, no steep inclines today. We were in the process of finding a working a system, at what time to pack up, when to eat breakfast and lunch etc. Usually we used distance as a good indicator. During the bag making I ate a breakfast bar, at 5k we ate a bigger breakfast with oatmeal, protein powder, home made dehydrated fruits, nuts and some foraged fruits. then around 12k, just over the half way mark, we aimed to eat lunch. My go-to is wraps filled with cheese and chili lumpia sauce as condiment. We set up camp for the second night right before a descent, so we could start of the third day easily. Once again, the sky provided and I once again enjoyed a beautiful light show.

The next day the terrain became more rugged and the landscape more open, barely any sign of life to be seen, at least, until we were greeted by a small group of reindeer, unphased by our presence. Number two of our check list was crossed off (the Northern lights being the first one). The third night did not provide, or rather, the clouds hid the beauty of that night’s lights from us, but that was okay, to be too spoiled isn’t good either. On day four, we had a variety of landscapes, our trail passed through some forests, and wide river crossings and steep inclines dotted our path. The next night we slept in a forest, not ideal because of the high humidity, but our feet needed the rest and we’d already travelled a good 24km. Now the Northern lights showed through the tree branches, the first time I saw them like that.

The next day was hard, long forest sections and difficult terrain, but the views in the afternoon were completely worth it. The temperatures were dropping too, the early morning just before sunrise -5°C was usual. Although Anna’s sleeping bag that I slept in ever since that first night (so that she could use mine) held up until then, but the negative’s also started to worry me. Most I had ever done was around 12 degrees under the recommended value, but 20 degrees is really pushing it. The nights were also getting longer, summer time was coming to an end. But all this justified the trek to be called an adventure, which I think makes it worth it. We were averaging around 22km each day and moving at 4.4km/h, pretty good, no?

The coming days it was more of the same, beautiful landscapes, glacier-topped mountainsides, waterfalls, thundering rivers, sections where we could seemingly look as far as the end of the earth, perfect weather, and never ending supplies of delicious blueberries, crowberries and lingonberries. What I enjoy most, or at least top 5, is the silence, after a few days I become aware of the absence of everything, the noise of the wind and the distant sound of trees or water. Nothing else. What I also enjoyed was the crazy sounding placenames, my keyboard doesn’t even allow the letters used to make these words, but to give you an idea, I really liked Čievččasčahca in the North of Øvre Dividal National Park. Sadly I didn’t get the chance of summiting Jerta, one of the taller mountains of the area.

We were getting into the routine of the trail, which was a lovely feeling, but made it also pass more quickly. Before we knew it, we passed into Sweden again, and a bit later we were back in Norway. This meant that the next day, we’d arrive at the three-country-point and that the trail would soon come to an end. At these points, my feelings of longing and desire usually take over, I try to keep thinking about how beautiful the surroundings still are, but every step brings me closer to the inevitable end and my return to daily life, which is what I try to avoid even in daily life. Anyway, my wonder and admiration diminishes even if I try to stop it. We pass into Finland, with view on the Golden mountain, which was shining to greet us. the last stretch was still amazing, but at the same time more day hikers started popping up on trail, which was to be expected, but still something to get used to after almost two weeks of solitude. To Anna this was a welcome sight, to me, it meant the end of adventure and made me dream about my next one. After a long descent through birch forest we arrived unceremoniously at a road, the only leading northwest in Finland, and we were forced to hike down it for a few k’s until we would arrive at our bus stop for the next morning.

That would have been the case, except that we booked a small log cabin in the town right next to the bus stop. But a few cars were passing by, so I suggested to hitch a ride for the 5km down the road, and, of course, that worked without any issue. The friendly Swedish couple dropped us off at the cabin where they had stayed only a few years prior and they warned us of how “barebones” it is. With this they meant there was no shower, no hot water, but there was electricity, a sauna and a large cauldron to heat up our water. I loved it, because it married my yearning for adventure to Anna’s need for comfort. I made a fire and heated up the water as well as the Sauna. We enjoyed some good Finish food and slept early because our bodies needed to recover. The next day it was time to start our journey back to civilization, starting with a long bus, transferring to a train in Rovaniemi and then taking the night train to Helsinki. Anna had a flight to catch but I had a full day to explore. I like solo city-tripping because I can usually do everything I want to do without having to make compromises.

On the way to Helsinki I started looking up what I wanted to do, what I did not expect to be doing is going to a Japanese movie, subbed in only Finish and Swedish. Even though I didn’t understand a lot of it, I think that made the experience quite unique and memorable. I really loved the movie — Perfect Days, directed by Wim Wenders and written by him and Takuma Takasaki, for anyone interested.

This trek is very dear to me, it challenged me in ways I did expect but also in ways that I did not expect. It thought me some things that I didn’t anticipate, but most of all it left me wanting more and it showed me that Lapland will always have this special place in my heart that will keep me calling back to it.